So, here do you remember this gallery
where we were using scale and
rotate to specify scale and
rotate transform separately and
we have this transition on hover.
So, specifying a transition
seems to work just fine here.
But what if we want to specify different
parameters for the scale transition and
different parameters for
the background transition?
Right now we've just specified the time,
which basically tells the browser,
transition whatever you can transition,
just make it last half a second.
But if we want to provide
separate parameters,
we can actually specify different
parameters for each property.
So, for example, you see how the pictures
become bigger when you hover,
what if we wanted them to bounce as well?
What if we wanted them to become
a little bit bigger than snap back?
We can actually do that with
a custom cubic-bezier function.
So, let's open cubic-bezier.com.
And, if we have a cubic-bezier
function that goes out of range,
like it goes over 100% for
the y-axis, that gives us a bounce.
We can see it like this,
see how it bounces.
Let's copy it and we can actually
modify the numbers themselves,
to create a more intense bounce.
Right now the bounce is a bit subtle,
so I'm gonna specify 2 here.
It's still a bit subtle, let's specify 3,
okay, that gets us somewhere.
So, notice that now because we're applying
this cubic-bezier timing function to both
of the things that are being transitioned,
we get a bounce for both of them.
Whereas we only wanted a bounce for
the scale.
A bounce looks kind of weird for
the colors.
We would never want colors
to be bouncing like this.
Let me show you again, when I hover
the color goes to light yellow.
But first, it goes to intense
yellow because it's bouncing, and
that looks really strange, do you see it?
So, we don't want to use this bouncing
cubic-bezier function for colors.
So, let's instead specify
individual parameters for
each property that is being transitioned.
So, we have the cubic-bezier for
the scale and
we have just five seconds and
background and we're just gonna
use the default,
ease timing function for the background.
I don't even need to
specify it is the default.
And notice that, now we're getting
a transition for the color, but
we stopped getting a transition for
the scale anymore.
What happened there,
suddenly our code broke.
So, what actually happened is explained
if we look at the specification it,
says and I quote CSS variables can
even be transitioned or animated.
But since the UA has no way
to interpret their contents,
they always use the flips at
50% behavior that is used for
any other pair of values that can't
be intelligently interpolated.
So, how did we get a transition
in the first place?
Until we did this,
we were actually getting a transition.
This is because it wasn't the scale
property that was being transitioned,
it was the actual transform.
Like if we scope this to
the actual transform property,
we'll get our transition again and
it actually works fine,
the colors are what we want and
the bounce is what we want.
But what if we actually wanted to
only transition the scale property?
What can we do in that case?
So, the short answer is,
if we wanted to work in every
browser there's not much we can do.
But if we're okay with using at property,
we can just register it.
If we register it, and we can't register
it as an anything goes variable.
We need to register it with an actual
syntax, in this case a number.
And give it an initial value and
inherits, let's say false.
Alright, yes, we don't want to
give it an initial value of zero.
An initial value of zero would
make it entirely disappear.
It's scale we want the initial
value to be one, like no change.
So now,
even though we're animating the scale,
we're transitioning the scale property,
it works just fine.
So, custom properties can
trigger transitions but
do not interpolate by default.
However, registering the custom
property can fix this,
registered custom
properties can interpolate.
Here, we have an animation that
goes from one color to another.
And let's say we wanted to use
our actual colors instead of
repeating them in the keyframes,
can we do that?
So, That actually works just fine.
Using a var function in keyframes or
in values of properties,
that works just fine.
We don't need to register a property to be
able to use the var function in keyframes.
However, if what we
were transitioning was,
if we wanted to animate a property.
Let's say we had a color property, and
we would set it to accent color one here,
And then we wanted to
animate that property,
And actually we don't even need it here
let's just set background to var color.
So, notice what happened here?
Even though our code is
functionally equivalent,
suddenly we lost the animation.
And instead we get this
flips at 50% behavior.
It just goes from yellow to
turquoise with nothing in between.
And this is because we are trying to
animate a non registered property.
Again, we can fix this by registering it,
if we say property color,
we give it a syntax.
And we need the other descriptors as well.
Let's say black for initial value and
now everything's good again.
So, to sum up,
var in key frames works just fine but
animating the actual properties
requires registration.
So, what can we do if we're okay
with registering custom properties?
A primary use case is animating gradients,
often people want to animate a part
of a gradient like the position of a color
stop, a specific color on the color stop.
In the past, there used to be a section
in the images specification that tried to
describe how gradients can interpolate.
Like if you were trying to
animate between two gradients,
the browser would try to figure out
how to do the animation intelligently.
Now, most browsers never implemented this,
the only implementation was Edge
before it switched to Chromium.
So, right now there is no implementation
of gradient interpolation.
However, this is where
custom properties come in.
Instead of this insane
complexity of the browser trying
to figure out how to
animate two gradients, and
us having to add dummy color stops to
teach it how to animate two gradients.
Instead we can actually code
the animation however we want and
avoid repetition by
using custom properties.
So, here we are trying to animate between
these two gradients and obviously
as you can see nothing's happening not
much of an animation is happening.
Because we can't animate
between two gradients.
But what if we use a custom property for
the position which is the only thing
that varies between these two gradients.
Let's say, let's specify a p value,
let's give it 0% here.
And in the keyframe, we override p to 100%
instead of repeating the gradient, and
obviously we still don't get an animation
because we haven't registered it.
But once we register it, see what happens.
So, we're gonna register
it as a percentage, And
set inherits to, let's set it to false and
initial-value 0%.
And notice how this
beautifully animates now.
I don't even need to set it here because
we've set the initial value to 0%.
If you look at the notes, there are also
some links to resources where you
can read more about cool things you
can do with animating gradients.
For example, one of these even includes
an entire image reveal with slides,
it's really cool.
There's so many effects we can do
basically by expanding this technique.
And one thing to keep in mind,
is that sometimes we may want
to mirror CSS properties with custom
properties to set multiple at once.
For example, a common workaround for
vendor prefixes is for
example backdrop filter,
which is what does the blurring
behind this panel?
So, backdrop filter
still requires a prefix.
In some browsers a webkit prefix, other
browsers support the unprefix property.
So ,instead of using autoprefix to
add the prefixes automatically, or
writing everything twice, we could use
a custom property to set both at once.
It's the same pattern we've seen before of
using a custom property on the universal
selector and setting it to initial so
it doesn't inherit.
However, this does have a problem.
This does introduce a problem that was not
there when we were just using the built in
properties, let's say, We want to
change this backdrop filter on hover.
And make it blur more, let's say 20
pixels instead of say two pixels and
let's add a transition for
this, let's make it one second.
And we're animating backdrop,
oops backdrop filter.
And note that this doesn't animate.
And not only does this not animate, but
even if we were okay with using that
property to enable it to animate.
We can't actually use that property here,
because there is no syntax that describes
the value space of backdrop filter.
It's not a number, it's not a percentage,
it's not an image, it's not a length.
It's like it's none of these primitive
values that we can specify there.
In this individual, in this specific case,
we can actually just
apply the transition to everything and
take advantage of the fact
that custom properties can trigger
transitions of other properties.
Or if we wanted to explicitly
filter out which properties
the transition applies to.
We would need to list all of
them like backdrop-filter,
webkit-backdrop-filter.
And then this works again but
we cannot actually animate
dash dash backdrop filter.
So, yes CSS variables enable you to
set multiple properties at once and
this is really cool but
they do not interpolate.